# Evolutionary-rescue-and-geographic-range-shifts-under-climate-change-for-global-amphibians
By the end of this century, human-induced climate change and habitat loss may reduce biodiversity drastically, with expected effects on many amphibian lineages. We employ a macroecological approach to dynamically model geographic range shifts by coupling ENMs and eco-evolutionary mechanisms, aiming to assess the probability of evolutionary rescue (i.e., rapid adaptation) and dispersal under climate change. Evolutionary models estimated the probability of population persistence by adaptively tracking changes in the mean temperature for the following decades, compensating the fitness reduction and maintaining viable populations in the new climates, taking into account eco-physiological mechanisms related to water and heat losses. In addition, we evaluated emerging patterns of species richness and turnover at the assemblage level. Our approach was able to identify which amphibian populations, within their geographic ranges and for the 7193 species at the global scale, could adapt to temperature changes or disperse into suitable regions in the future. Without evolutionary adaptation and dispersal, about 47.7% of the species would indeed go extinct by the year 2100, whereas adding both processes will slightly decrease this extinction rate to 36.5%. Although adaptation to climate is possible for populations in about 25.7% of species, the evolutionary rescue is the only option to avoid extinction in 4.2% of them. Dispersal will potentially allow geographic range shifts and persistence for 49.7% of species, but only 6.5% may avoid extinction by reaching suitable climatically environments. This reconfiguration of species persistence and distribution creates new assemblage-level patterns at the regional scale. Most of the temporal beta-diversity across the globe is due to the loss of species, with relatively low levels of temporal turnover of species. Despite limitations, our approach advances in providing more realistic assessments of species response to ongoing changes. It shows that, although dispersal and evolutionary rescue may attenuate species losses, they are not enough to avoid significant contractions of species’ geographic ranges in the future. Increasing the resilience of biodiversity to climate change requires actions that guarantee a higher potential for adaptation (e.g., genetic diversity through larger population sizes) and dispersal of species to track suitable climates through enhancing connectivity.
